==== title

Hello! My talk is called "Light Higgs channel of
magnon BEC decay in 3He-B".
It is a popular topic now to classify collective modes
in complicated systems with spontaneously broken symmetries.
I will talk about such a classification for 3He-B,
and also about our experiments where we see interaction between
different modes.

First I briefly recall a few things about 3He.

==== he3 0:40

It is an isotope of helium and it stays liquid down to the
absolute zero temperature.
It is a Fermi liquid, and it becomes superfluid due to Cooper
pairing at about 1 mK.

Cooper pairs in 3He have orbital momentum 1 and spin 1. Order parameter
in the superfluid transition is a complex matrix 3x3 which shows
relation between spin and orbital spaces of cooper pairs.

This is a phase diagram of 3He. You can see two superfluid phases, A and
B,  normal liquid at higher temperatures and solid phase at high
pressures. We are working with the B phase at the zero temperature limit.

In the B-phase equilibrium order parameter has this form:
a gap, which depends on temperature and pressure, phase factor
and a rotation matrix R

The condensation energy is degenerate with respect to changes of
phase and matrix R.

If we consider oscillations of the order parameter, we find 18 different
modes (because the order parameter has 18 components). Four of them are
so-called phase modes, or Nambu-Goldstone bosons, gapless modes which
correspond to the motion of the order parameter in this degenerate space.
Other 14 modes are called amplitude modes, or Higgs bosons.

Now I want to explain this classification again,
on a simpler system.

==== ferromagnet
Let's consider a ferromagnet.
There is also a phase transition with spontaneous breaking of
rotation symmetry.
Order parameter is a magnetization, a vector with 3 components.

Since the system is symmetric with respect to rotations, the
energy depends on the order parameter in this way:
It has a minimum at some non-zero amplitude of magnetization,
but it does not depend on the direction of it.

If we look at oscillations of the magnetization, we find one amplitude
mode, oscillation of the magnetization amplitude and two phase modes,
rotations of magnetization. Only one is drawn here, but there is one
more magnetization component and rotation in the perpendicular direction
is also possible.

Spectra of these three modes are drawn here.
Higgs mode has energy gap, you can see that energy is needed to
excite such oscillations, NG modes are gapless, no energy is
needed for uniform rotation.

These two modes are spin waves, and the slope is a spin wave velocity.

In the presence of magnetic field the equilibrium magnetization
is oriented along the field and spin wave modes are splitted.

Two branches are called optical and acoustic magnons. In a simple NMR
experiment we can see this uniform precession at Larmor frequency,
which is proportional to the field.

Now let's return back to 3He-B
==== modes 6:13

The order parameter in 3He-B has 18 components, and this means 18
collective modes. Spectra are drawn here.

The degenerate space is determined by the superfluid phase
and rotation matrix R and has 4 dimensions, and this means four NG
gapless modes. Other 14 modes are Higgs modes.

It's convenient to write the matrix in terms
of rotation axis n and rotation angle theta.
In all experiments it's important to know
the equilibrium distribution of n, so-called texture.

Motion of phase is sound and motion of n and theta are spin waves.
They have slightly different velocities.

Here are Higgs modes. They have energy gaps of the order of Delta.
They have been observed quite a long time ago, in experiments with dissipation
of ultrasound. They are called pair breaking modes, imaginary squashing modes,
real squashing modes.

In our experiments we study 3He using NMR at frequency of about 1MHz. So
we can see only spin waves in this region.

At this low energy scale a coupe of additional effects should be taken
into account.

==== spin-waves modes 9:04
First is a magnetic field. In the simple case where H is parallel to 
n equilibrium position,
motion of n corresponds to transverse spin waves, motion of transverse
magnetization, and these two modes are very similar to that in ferromagnets.

There is also a splitting into optical and acoustic branches and
in NMR we can see a uniform precession at Larmor frequency.

Motion of theta is low-energy longitudinal spin
oscillations, which is unique for 3He-B.

This mode is affected by small spin orbit interaction. Energy
is written here, it depends only on theta at has a minimum
at theta=104 degrees.

OmegaB is a very important parameter, it is called Leggett frequency,
it is of the order of 100kHz.

This effect introduces an additional symmetry breaking
on the low energy scale. Now the degenerate space of the order parameter
does not include the theta angle. We have a Higgs mode instead
of Nambu-Goldstone one. The gap is equal to OmegaB, which is much smaller then
gaps of heavy Higgs modes.

Similar type of a symmetry breaking at the low
energy scale is discussed in particle physics. There it is called
Little Higgs.
Here we can build an analog of a vector Higgs field
using vector N and angle T, and we will have all formulas
similar to that in particle physics.

And this symmetry breaking with one Higgs and 2 NG
modes can be observed in usual NMR experiments.

Now let's switch to our experiments, where we are working
with this three modes.

==== experiment 12:11
This is our experimental setup, it is very simple: 
a cylindrical quartz cell with 3He in a magnetic field
which is directed along the cell axis.
There are transverse NMR coils to excite and detect oscillations of the
transverse magnetization,
and a longitudinal coil, which produces a field minimum
in the axial direction.

Equilibrium distribution of the order parameter in this geometry
forms so-called flare-out texture.
n-vector is vertical in the center and is tilted near walls because
of boundary conditions.

We are working with optical magnons close to Larmor frequency.
They can be treated as quantum particles in a potential formed by
the texture and magnetic field.

This flare-out texture and field of the longitudinal coil produce
a harmonic energy trap for magnons. The potential in axial and radial
direction is shown by these blue lines.
Red lines show the ground state wave function in this trap.

We can observe individual eigenstates in this potential trap, and if
initial density of magnons is large enough they form a Bose condensate.
The magnon condensate (or standing spin wave)
is a coherent state which is very useful in experiments.

Here is an example of the NMR signal of this state, it precesses at about 1Mhz and lasts
for tens or even hundreds of seconds. The relaxation is exponential
and it is determined by spin diffusion and also by energy dissipation
in the NMR circuit.

Magnon condensate can be used in many different experiments,
here we study its interaction with other spin-wave modes.

==== suhl 15:30

The first important effect which we see is Suhl instability. It is a
non-linear effect in usual NMR, where a uniform precession of
magnetization  parametrically excites acoustic magnons, or in our case
the longitudinal light Higgs mode.

This can be shown as a decay of magnon with zero k vector
into two quasiparticles with two times smaller frequency
and opposite k-vectors. Momentum and energy conserve in
this process.

This instability exists only at high tipping angle of magnetization.
starting from some threshold, which depends
on the relaxation in the parametrically excited mode.
At low amplitudes NMR precession is stable.

We can observe this effect.
This is an example of our signal, the relaxation is small below
some threshold, but above it we have this instability.

How we can identify this processes?
===

We can measure this threshold as a function of field, or magnon frequency.

You can see, that this light Higgs channel of decay
can exist only when frequency is larger then 2Omega_B. We can cross this value
and see how the threshold changes.

The decay to acoustic magnons can also depend on the frequency.
The reason is that acoustic magnons are confined in our cell, and
the spectrum is quantizes because of that. We are using our cell as a resonator
and observe resonances at certain frequencies.

We use simple  resonance condition, the wave phase difference
across the cell should be pi multiplied by some integer.

Using formulas for the spectrum one can find a period in NMR frequency,
where we can expect this resonances. Here c is a spin wave velocity
and R is the cell radius.

This spin wave velocity is not a simple thing
because it depends on the texture, on the orientation
of the n vector. And it changes across the cell. We should
use some averaged value for spin-wave velocity
but it can be calculated.

We did this measurements.

==== suhl - experiment 20:35

This is the result. Threshold amp vs freq at different pressures. Here
we see a clear drop at 2Omega_B. It is drawn here as a function
of pressure. Blue line is a combined result of other types of
measurements.  Frequency range of our NMR spectrometer is limited and we
can measure Leggett frequency only at high pressures where it is high. Our
way to measure Leggett freq seems to be quite accurate, it does not
depend on the texture, and the resolution here is very high.

We can also see periodic peaks on the threshold amplitude,
The period of these peaks as a function of pressure is quite close
to the formula for resonances which I wrote before.

That is all about Suhl instability. But we have one more
way to excite acoustic magnons and see similar resonances in the cell.

==== vort 22:50

We have a possibility to rotate our cryostat. Rotation produces
quantized vortices which go through the cell and through the
magnon condensate.

Vortices in He3-B at low temperatures have non-axisymmetric cores. 
They are oriented by the texture and can oscillate in the region
of magnon condensate, where magnetization and texture precess.

The oscillations of vortices non-harmonic and they can produce
acoustic magnons at frequencies omega, 2omega and so on.

Resonances of acoustic magnons with frequency N omega can be
calculated in the same way as for parametrically excited magnons
with frequency omega/2. The period in NMR frequency is written here.

Excitation of acoustic magnons increases the relaxation of the
magnon condensate. We measured the relaxation rate as a function
of frequency, and we found periodic peaks on it.

Here is the example, and you can see this modulation because
of two different sets of peaks with close periods.

Here these periods are plotted as a function of pressure.
lines are this formula with different N.

Sometimes we can see peaks with two of four times
larger periods compared with this formula. And at different pressures we can see
different peaks.
This is probably because different mutual disposition
of vortex cores and wave nodes.
Probably our distribution of vortices we can excite only some
of possible resonances.

But the agreement looks very good, there are no fitting
parameters, only spin wave velocity, measured in other experiments
and radius of the cell.

