Hello, I'll tell about our present work in Aalto University. We are
working with rotating superfluid 3He at very low temperatures. This is
our rotating cryostat. In rotation we are studying vortices, their
dynamics and structure. I'll tell about magnon condensate - an
interesting magnetic state which we are using as an instrument for
studying He3 properties.

First I recall some facts about superfluid 3He. It is an isotope of
helium and it stays liquid down to the absolute zero temperature. Unlike
4He it is a Fermi liquid, and superfluidity in it occurs due to cooper
pairing at about 1 mK temperature.

Cooper pairs in 3He have non-zero spin and non-zero orbital moment. This
is the reason for rather complicated order parameter and many
interesting properties.

3He is a pure substance. No other substance can be solved in it at such
temperatures. It is very convenient for experiments. In most cases
experimental results are in a very good agreement with the theory.

===

Here is phase diagram of 3He. There is a solid phase and two superfluid
phases, A and B. These phases have different type of order parameter. We
are interested in the B-phase at low temperatures.

===

Order parameter of B phase is written here. It consists of energy gap,
which depends on pressure and temperature, phase factor, and a matrix 3
by 3 which is a rotation matrix. This matrix shows relationship between
spin and orbital spaces of cooper pairs. We can describe rotation matrix
by unity vector n, the axis of rotation and the angle of rotation theta.

Angle theta is fixed by spin-orbit interaction and its value is close to
104 degrees. Vector n is set by magnetic field and cell walls, forming
some texture. This is distribution of n for a cylindrical cell in a
magnetic field.

===

An important techinque for studying He3 is Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance. We apply some constant magnetic field and excite oscillations
of magnetization around its equilibrium position. In He3 magnetization
precesses together with order parameter. Its motion is close to Larmor
precession but there is some frequency shift which depends on the
texture.

In our cylindrical cell we have a minimum of precession frequency in
the middle.

Another important thing in He3-B is superfluid spin currents. These
currents are caused by gradients of order parameter and transfer
magnetization.

Here we have gradients of order parameter because of inhomogeneous
precession. As a result motion of magnetization is strongly affected by
spin currents. A standing spin wave can appear in this geometry.
A coherent state which is supported by spin currents and precesses at
single frequency which depends on this profile.

This complicated effect can be explained in terms of magnon
quasiparticles. In this picture tipping angle and phase of magnetization
corresponds to wave function of magnon and frequency corresponds to
energy.

So we have an energy potential for magnons with some energy levels in
it. And standing spin waves correspond to Bose condensation of magnons
in a specific level of this potential trap.

===

In our experiments 3d trap for magnons is formed  by order parameter
texture in radial direction. And in axial direction we apply magnetic field
with a minimum to produce a minimum of Larmor frequency.

Our trap is close to harmonic one. Energy levels in a harmonic
cylindrical trap are written here. There are three quantum numbers:
radial, azimuthal and axial. But we can't see all these states on NMR
signal because some of them have zero total magnetization. We can see
only states with zero azimuthal number and even axial number.

These energy levels are a good probe for a texture.
In rotation we have polarized vortices, which go through the whole
volume, modify the texture and shifts these level.
We can also observe slow processes of vortex dynamics for example
after spinning up of spinning down the cryostat.

===

How can we see magnon condensates? At continues wave NMR we can see
all energy levels as a sharp maxima on the spectrum. There are groups
of peaks which correspond to different radial numbers: 0,1,2.... Peaks
inside each group correspond to different axial numbers: 0,2,4...
The whole width corresponds to the depth of our trap.

We also can observe these states (usually ground state) in a pulsed NMR.

===

Here is an example of free decay signal at low temperature.
We excite magnon condensate by short pulse and then record a long
decay signal. This is a result of sliding fft transformation of this
signal.

There is one important non-linear effect visible here: change of
frequency. This happens because magnons modify the texture. If we
pump more magnons to our trap, it becomes wider and frequency levels go
down.

In this talk I am speaking only about linear effects. We always
have a good exponential decay of amplitude in the tail of signal. So we can
measure its relaxation rate in various conditions.

===

We measured the relaxation as a function of temperature and rotation
velocity.

Temperature is measured with quartz fork resonator. Its resonant width
shows density of normal component in He3 and drops exponentially with
temperature. You can see that relaxation is also a linear function of
normal component density.

This temperature dependent part of relaxation looks like spin diffusion,
and slopes of these lines are proportional to the size of magnon
condensate, as it should be for spin diffusion.

Another part is this zero temperature relaxation.
In is proportional to rotation velocity or to the number or vortices.

===

We attribute this relaxation to the dissipation of energy in vortex
cores.

The model have been proposed by V and K in 1998. At low temperatures
vortices in He3-B have non-symmetric core with large density of normal
component. Quasiparticles bound to the core have rather interesting
spectrum with small distances between levels.

Vortex core can oscillate together with magnetization, and this motion
can trigger transitions between bound states and dissipate energy.

We have only two values of zero temperature relaxation for two different
pressures and it is not enough to check this theory. But at least sign of
effect is correct: dissipation grows with pressure.

===

One more interesting thing we are studying now is a frequency dependance
of relaxation. We are limited by our resonant circuit with Q-value
130 and can observe only few tens of kilohertz region.

With rotation we found strange picture with peaks. This looks like
a periodic structure which period depends only on pressure. It does not
depends on temperature, rotation velocity, size of magnon condensate...

Now we are trying to understand, can these peaks be connected to the
spectrum of quasiparticles in vortex cores.

