Hello! Yesterday you already heard about magnon condensate in superfluid
3He-B. Now I'm going to tell how we use it for studying vortex cores.

===

First I briefly recall some things about 3He. It is an isotope of helium
and it stays liquid down to the absolute zero temperature. It is a Fermi
liquid, and superfluidity in it occurs due to cooper pairing at about 1
mK temperature.

Cooper pairs have non-zero spin and non-zero orbital moment. There are
two different superfluid phases in 3He. We are interested in the B phase
In the B phase spins and orbital momentums of cooper pairs are not
ordered, but there is an ordering in mutual orientation of spin and
orbit space. There is a macroscopic quantity, order parameter, which is
written here. It consists of energy gap, which depends on pressure and
temperature, phase factor, and a matrix a rotation matrix. This matrix
shows relationship between spin and orbital spaces of cooper pairs.
Rotation matrix can be described by unity vector n, the axis of rotation
and the angle of rotation theta.

Angle theta is fixed by spin-orbit interaction and its value is close to
104 degrees. Vector n is set by magnetic field and cell walls. Here is
an example of distribution of vector n in a cylindrical cell parallel to 
a magnetic field.

===

An important technique for studying He3 is a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance.
Spin dynamics is rather complicated:
Order parameter is involved in the motion of magnetization because of
spin-orbit interaction; texture changes precession frequency; superfluid
spin currents transfer magnetization.

This dynamics can be described in terms of magnon quasiparticles, moving
in the energy potential formed by texture and magnetic field. In this
picture tipping angle and phase of magnetization correspond to magnon
wave function, and precession frequency plays role of energy.

In our experiments we have an energy trap for magnons w“ich is made by a
texture in the radial radial direction and by external magnetic field
with a minimum in the axial direction. This energy trap has discrete
energy levels and we can see these levels in a CW NMR signal. You can
see two sets of peaks wich correspond to two quantum numbers: radial and
axial. This spectrum is a good tool for studying textures. For example,
if we have vortices, this picture changes and we can measure effect of
vortices on the texture.

===

If we pump magnons to our trap they form Bose condensate on the ground
level. We can see this in a pulse NMR as a coherent long living signal
with a certain frequency. Frequency changes because magnons modify
texture. We can study relaxation rate of this signal.

Here you can see temperature dependence of the relaxation. It is plotted
as a function of resonance width of a quartz tuning fork which we are
using as a thermometer. It measures 3He viscosity and drops exponentially
with a temperature. You can see nice linear dependence and it can be
explained by spin diffusion. Spin diffusion coefficient drops
exponentially with temperature, and the slope of this line also depends
on the size of the magnon condensate, on magnetization gradients in it.

===

Now I'm coming to the main part of my talk. We can rotate our cryostat
with constant velocity and create vortices which go through the magnon
condensate and change the relaxation.

Here you can see the same plot, but for various rotation velocities.
Change in slope can be explained by the geometrical change of the
condensate. Vortices modify texture, potential for magnons becomes
narrower, gradients of magnetization grow and relaxation increases.
Using CW measurements we can check that slope is inversely proportional
to the size of the magnon condensate.

More interesting thing is this additional relaxation which does not
depend on the temperature. This is the dissipation of energy in
vortex cores.

===

Vortices in He3-B at low temperatures have non-axisymmetric cores. There
if an energy which orients vortex in the order parameter texture. Here n
is order parameter vector n, l is orbital anisotropy axis and b is the
orientation of a vortex.

In the magnon condensate magnetization and order parameter precess,
and this causes a precession of the vortex. This motion transfers
energy from magnon condensate to the normal component in the vortex
core. This can be written as a friction term in the motion equation of
the vortex.

Relaxation of magnon condensate can be written in terms of these
parameters. It is also proportional to the number of vortices, or
rotation velocity of the cryostat. We can see this proportionality
in the experiment.

This model have been proved 20 years ago in experiments with
homogeneously precessing domain - another coherent state in He3-B, which
exists in higher temperatures.

===

The theory predicts how these coefficients depend on pressure and
magnetic field. And we can compare these dependencies with the
experiment.

Relaxation should be proportional to one over H in forth power,
and for pressure we have some combination of Fermi-liquid parameters
You can see that agreement is raver good.


===

But this is not the only thing we can see in this experiments.

Normal component in the vortex core is localized in the plane
perpendicular to the vortex line. And we have a discrete spectrum as a
function af angular momentum. (And continuous spectrum as a function of
momentum along the vortex line). Distance between these branches is
called minigap, and it should be about 100 kHz, much smaller then gap.

At low temperatures lifetime of quasiparticles is long, and it can
be possible to resolve these energy levels.

We tried to study relaxation as a function of NMR frequency (or magnetic
field) and we found periodic dissipation peaks existing only in the
presence of vortices.

We still do not know does these peaks correspond to resonant transitions
between these energy states. Period of these peaks is much smaller
then predicted minigap value. And pressure dependance of
these period does not correspond to this formula.

Now we are studying this effect in a wide range of NMR frequencies and
temperatures, and we found many various things.

===

For example at higher temperature we see not only 1 kHz period,
but also 2.6 kHz, and also some additional peak here. And this
picture changes with temperature. If we plot relaxation in a
few points as a function of temperature,

===

... we can see, that these peaks disappear
at some temperature.

This temperature strongly depends on NMR frequency. An important thing
is that this dependance is not exponential. This can be an argument that
this is an effect from normal Fermi-liquid in vortex cores, becouse all
parameters in superfluid He3 changes exponentially with temperature.

But still we have no explanation of these peaks, and we continue
measurements.
